First pass at an explicit requirements document. (#6)
zcash/orchard: book/src/requirements.md

# Requirements

The design of Orchard aims to be mostly identical to the Sapling circuit in functionality.

## Scope of Requirements

These requirements are scoped to the protocol design itself, which excludes important broader considerations for Orchard as a whole, such as usability goals for a wallet which aren't directly constrained by the protocol. Additionally, an ideal criteria for these requirements is that any outside reviewer with sufficient domain expertise should be able to verify that the existing protocol specification meets the requirements in this document. This excludes requirements based on specific authorities / orgs / people.

Finally, there is a category of proposed requirements that could have been coherently in-scope for Orchard which were excluded due to time & complexity constraints.

These scope clarifications exlude some draft requirements found in earlier revisions of this document, in pull request comments, or elsewhere. Many of those could become ZIPs in their own right.

## Protocol Product Requirements

> ### ProtoPR1. Orchard Relies on a Zeroknowledge Proving System which is Secure in The Uniform Random String Model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### ProtoPR1. Orchard Relies on a Zero-Knowledge Proving System that is Secure in The Uniform Random String Model
```

> **Requirement:** The Orchard shielded transfer circuit uses a Zeroknowledge Proving System which is secure in the Uniform Random String (URS) Model, and therefore has no reliance on a trusted setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Requirement:** The Orchard shielded transfer circuit uses a Zero-Knowledge Proving System that is secure in the Uniform Random String (URS) Model, and therefore has no reliance on a trusted setup.
```

**Rationale - UX:** Users who rely on Orchard are not directly vulnerable to the class of trusted parameter compromises.

**Rationale - Strategic:** As Sprout and Sapling usage declines or are deprecated, the ZEC a whole will become protected from any previous trusted setup compromise henceforth.

> **Rationale - Strategic:** By avoiding a requirement on a trusted setup, Orchard *and future* upgrades no longer need a parameter setup MPC process, which improves protocol agility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Rationale - Strategic:** By avoiding a requirement on a trusted setup, Orchard *and future* upgrades no longer need a parameter setup MPC process, which improves protocol agility and the ability to respond quickly to security vulnerabilities.
```

### ProtoPR2. Orchard Addresses

**Requirement:** Orchard introduces a new address format with an unambiguous user-facing encoding.

> **Rationale - UX:** A new address format allows users to identify which ZKP platform their funds rely on.

Reviewer: Is this consistent with the proposal to switch to mainly relying on address bundles?

Author: Great point. The address bundle may be ambiguous depending on some trade-offs.

For example if it's intended to be backwards compatible with t-addr wallets and conform to [ZIP-321](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0321) then maybe it will be ambiguous to users.

In fact, the word "unambiguous" is ambiguous: does it mean "users don't confuse Orchard addresses for other kinds of addresses" or does it mean "the user facing encoding of Orchard addresses is unambiguously specified (so that all conforming implementations use the same encoding)". When I wrote this, I meant the former.

I'm going to leave this as a pending comment and circle around with people on Address Bundle clarity.

**Rationale - UX:** A new address format, in combination with the turnstile design, signals to users a boundary for turnstile-based supply integrity protections.

**Rationale - UX:** A new address format, in combination with the turnstile design, signals to users a boundary for privacy-guarantees.

**Counter-rationale - UX:** This complicates the simplified narrative of "z→z has strong privacy" because migrating between pools has a privacy cost.

**Rationale - Engineering:** A new address format simplifies cryptographic design and performance.

### ProtoPR3. An Orchard Shielded Pool and Turnstile

**Requirement:** A new shielded pool is introduced with Orchard. ZEC may only enter the Orchard pool from t-addrs or shielded migration transactions, following the same "turnstile" design as for Sprout and Sapling.

**Rationale - UX:** A separate shielded pool clarifies which funds rely on which underlying ZKP/cryptographic platform.

**Rationale - UX:** A separate shielded pool associated with a new address type makes it easier to reason about migration.

### ProtoPR4. Orchard Privacy Protections are Independent of Soundness.

> **Requirement:** Orchard's privacy protections are independent of proving system soundness so that a soundness compromise does not compromise any privacy protections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Requirement:** Orchard's privacy protections are independent of proving system soundness (in the sense that the security arguments are disentangled from each other and can be separately verified) so that a soundness compromise does not compromise any privacy protections.
```

> **Rationale - UX:** Users can rely on the full privacy protections of Orchard even in the face of an Orchard soundness compromise, such as a successful countereiting attack.

Reviewer 2: typo: countereiting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Rationale - UX:** Users can rely on the full privacy protections of Orchard even in the face of an Orchard soundness compromise, such as a successful counterfeiting attack.
```

## Technical Strategy Requirements

### TSR1. Sapling-equivalent Functionality

**Requirement:** Unless other product or engineering concerns dictate, the functionality of

> Orchard should match that of the Sapling circuit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Orchard should match that of the Sapling shielded protocol.
```

**Rationale - UX:** By being functional equivalent to Sapling, the existing Sapling

> userbase can immediately carry over most conceptual knowledge and UX habits from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user base can immediately carry over most conceptual knowledge and UX habits from
```

Sapling to Orchard.

> **Rationale - Technical Strategy:** Orchard is the first step in removing the toxic waste

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Rationale - Technical Strategy:** Orchard is the first step in removing the trusted setup
```

vulnerability as well as in deploying Halo 2. By targeting Sapling circuit functionality,
the scope of Orchard R&D is greatly simplified to lower the strategic technical risk.

### TSR2. Differences from Sapling Design Document

**Requirement:** Every observable difference from Sapling from the perspective of a Mobile Wallet SDK, a zcashd RPC developer, or any user of any known services built with those components, must be documented in a "Differences from Sapling" document in this repository. Any change that impacts a product-level requirement must exist in this document as an explicit requirement.

**Rationale - Technical Strategy:** Any deviation from Sapling needs to be clearly communicated to users and developers and reviewed by protocol engineers, product owners, and ecosystem stakeholders.

### TSR3. Halo 2 Deployment

> **Requirement:** Orchard must use Halo 2 for zero knowledge proof validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Requirement:** Orchard must use Halo 2 for zero-knowledge proof validation.
```

> **Rationale - Technical Strategy:** By selecting Halo 2 as the ZKP platform for Orchard, the Orchard deployment provides a forcing function to productionize Halo 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Rationale - Technical Strategy:** By selecting Halo 2 as the ZKP platform for Orchard, the Orchard deployment provides a forcing function to productionize Halo 2, thus unlocking potential future applications of recursion/proof-carrying data while minimising short-term risk.
```

### TSR4. User Opt-in upon Activation

**Requirement:** Users may individually shield funds or migrate into a Orchard Pool as soon as the feature activates.

**Rationale - UX:** Users can act independently in opting into the Orchard Pool without coordinating globally.

### TSR5. Full Design Verifiability

**Requirement:** Any arbitrary future reviewer should be able to verify the entire design and public state of the Zcash blockchain without relying on external authorities. Note that the Trusted Setup ceremonies for Sprout and Sapling violate this goal, and while Orchard activation itself does not achieve the goal, it can be achieved if Sprout and Sapling pools are eventually retired.

**Rationale - Technical Strategy:** A permissionless system requires the possibility of full-design validation by any arbitrary participant, and the need for this grows as the technology grows in importance.

## Non-Requirements

This section documents potential requirements that are explicitly not required, and their implementation is up to the product and engineering teams best judgement.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### NonR1. Removing Sprout Functionality from the Consensus Protocol.

**Non-Requirement:** There will be no change in what is possible with Sprout funds at the consensus layer. (This leaves open the question of whether it will be possible to migrate funds directly from Sprout to Orchard within a transaction.)

**Rationale - Engineering:** This reduces the scope of consensus changes associated with NU5. Similar effects can be obtained by non-consensus restrictions (or just omission of functionality) in wallets. Consensus-level restrictions would have required changes in the migration design of [ZIP 308](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0308).

```

### NonR2. User-Defined Asset Precursor Support

**Non-Requirement:** The protocol does not require precursor support for a future User-Defined Assets feature.

> **Rationale - Technical Strategy:** Getting precursor support right requires certainty about a subset of UDA requirements, and blocking Orchard on clarifying future UDA requirements introduces more deployment & execution risk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Rationale - Technical Strategy:** Getting precursor support right requires certainty about a subset of UDA requirements, and blocking Orchard on clarifying future UDA requirements introduces more deployment & execution risk.

**Rationale - Engineering:** It appears to be possible to add UDAs in any case without explicit precursor support in this upgrade.
```

### ProtoR1. Orchard Relies on a Zero-Knowledge Proving System that is Secure in The Uniform Random String Model

**Requirement:** The Orchard shielded transfer circuit uses a Zero-Knowledge Proving System that is secure in the Uniform Random String (URS) Model, and therefore has no reliance on a trusted setup.

**Rationale - UX:** Users who rely on Orchard are not directly vulnerable to the class of trusted parameter compromises.

**Rationale - Strategic:** As Sprout and Sapling usage declines or are deprecated, the ZEC monetary base as a whole will become protected from any previous trusted setup compromise henceforth.

**Rationale - Strategic:** By avoiding a requirement on a trusted setup, Orchard *and future* upgrades no longer need a parameter setup multiparty computation (MPC) process, which improves protocol agility and the ability to respond quickly to security vulnerabilities.

### ProtoR2. Orchard Addresses

**Requirement:** Orchard introduces a new address format with an unambiguous user-facing encoding.

> **Rationale - UX:** A new address format allows users to identify which zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) platform their funds rely on.

Reviewer: The design in the protocol spec doesn't have this property. A user can only tell (by the `u1` prefix) that this is a unified address, not which pool will be used. Arguably, that isn't a property of addresses anyway: a user's funds depend primarily on the pool that their wallet holds them in.

**Rationale - UX:** A new address format reinforces the fact that users must migrate funds to opt into Orchard.

> **Rationale - UX:** A new address format, in combination with the turnstile design, signals to users a boundary for turnstile-based supply integrity protections.

Reviewer: The current design signals this to users once, when they switch to Orchard addresses. It doesn't signal any distinction among pools from Orchard onward. I don't think this is a problem, but it shouldn't be part of the rationale.

> **Rationale - UX:** A new address format, in combination with the turnstile design, signals to users a boundary for privacy-guarantees.

Reviewer: Ditto. Addresses do not signal any distinction among pools from Orchard onward, for either supply integrity or privacy.

> **Counter-rationale - UX:** This complicates the simplified narrative of "z→z has strong privacy" because migrating between pools has a privacy cost.

Reviewer: There shouldn't be any reference to [ZIP 308](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0308) here, if that's what you meant @nuttycom, because we don't intend to use it for the Sapling -> Orchard migration.

> **Rationale - Engineering:** A new address format simplifies cryptographic design and performance.

Reviewer: The design of Orchard requires switching to the Pasta cycle, which precludes sticking with Jubjub-based addresses. The overhead in circuit size of also supporting Sapling addresses in Pasta-based proofs would be at least 100x.

### ProtoR3. An Orchard Shielded Pool and Turnstile

**Requirement:** A new shielded pool is introduced with Orchard. ZEC may only enter the Orchard pool from t-addrs or shielded migration transactions, following the same "turnstile" design as for Sprout and Sapling.

**Rationale - UX:** A separate shielded pool clarifies which funds rely on which underlying ZKP/cryptographic platform.

> **Rationale - UX:** A separate shielded pool associated with a new address type makes it easier to reason about migration.

Reviewer: That isn't clear. Suppose for the sake of argument that we introduced a new pool after Orchard, for some reason such as better performance or to mitigate a cryptographic flaw. Suppose further that this didn't require a change to the abstract form of an address (i.e. (d, pk<sub>d</sub>)). What's the argument, in more detail, for how changing the address type would make it easier to reason about migration? I don't see it. (Remember that address types are hidden by the unified address abstraction anyway; they aren't visible to users.)

Reviewer: Oh, maybe you mean that *if* you have a new address type, then it's easier to reason about migration when there is a new shielded pool. But that isn't clear either! We could add an address type that supports detection keys, for example, and there would be no reason to create a new pool for it.

### ProtoR4. Orchard Privacy Protections are Independent of Soundness.

**Requirement:** Orchard's privacy protections are independent of proving system soundness (in the sense that the security arguments are disentangled from each other and can be separately verified) so that a soundness compromise does not compromise any privacy protections.

**Rationale - UX:** Users can reasonably rely on the full privacy protections of Orchard even in the face of an Orchard soundness compromise, such as a successful counterfeiting attack.

## Non-functional Requirements

> Non-functional requirements may not be verifiable from the protocol specification itself, but never-the-less define the goals, processes, or assessments used in delivering the Orchard protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-functional requirements may not be verifiable from the protocol specification itself, but nevertheless define the goals, processes, or assessments used in delivering the Orchard protocol.
```

### Technical Strategy Requirements

These requirements define and rationalize some high-level goal which may not be apparent from the design specification.

#### TSR1. Sapling-equivalent Functionality

**Requirement:** Unless other product or engineering concerns dictate, the functionality of
Orchard should match that of the Sapling shielded protocol.

> **Rationale - UX:** By being functional equivalent to Sapling, the existing Sapling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Rationale - UX:** By being functionally equivalent to Sapling, the existing Sapling
```

the scope of Orchard R&D is greatly simplified to lower the strategic technical risk.

#### TSR2. Differences from Sapling Design Document

**Requirement:** Every observable difference from Sapling from the perspective of a Mobile Wallet SDK, a zcashd RPC developer, or any user of any known services built with those components, must be documented in a "Differences from Sapling" document in this repository. Any change that impacts a product-level requirement must exist in this document as an explicit requirement.

**Rationale - Technical Strategy:** Any deviation from Sapling needs to be clearly communicated to users and developers and reviewed by protocol engineers, product owners, and ecosystem stakeholders.

#### TSR3. Halo 2 Deployment

**Requirement:** Orchard must use Halo 2 for zero-knowledge proof validation.

**Rationale - Technical Strategy:** By selecting Halo 2 as the ZKP platform for Orchard, the Orchard deployment provides a forcing function to productionize Halo 2, thus unlocking potential future applications of recursion/proof-carrying data while limiting short-term risk.

#### TSR4. User Opt-in upon Activation

> **Requirement:** Users may individually shield funds or migrate into the Orchard Pool as soon as the feature activates.

Reviewer 2: To me, "opt-in" (from the title of the issue) means "the user can decide to keep using the old thing, and has to explicitly decide to switch to the new thing, it's not forced on them" but I believe wallets may start auto-sheilding to Orchard. Does TSR4 mean wallets must make this opt-in, i.e. the wallet will keep working exactly as before until the user clicks a button to switch over to Orchard? I think some clarification is needed.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps the title should be "Availability to users upon activation"

# Requirements

The design of Pollard aimed to be mostly identical to the Sapling circuit in
functionality. We used this opportunity to clarify the requirements for Pollard at
the product and engineering levels.

## Protocol Product Requirements

> ### ProtoPR1. Pollard Addresses

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't the first Protocol Product Requirement be "Eliminate the Need for a Trusted Setup"?

Author: Yes, agreed. I believe this is strongly implied by some of the rationales, but I agree it's a foremost requirement.

Author: I've added a requirement to spell this out. Please see the `ProtoPR1` in revision 92ed81b.

**Requirement:** Pollard introduces a new address format with an unambiguous user-facing encoding.

**Rationale - UX:** A new address format allows users to identify which ZKP platform their funds rely on.

**Rationale - UX:** A new address format reinforces the fact that users must migrate funds to opt into Pollard.

> **Rationale - UX:** A new address format, in combination with the turnstile design, signals to users a boundary for privacy-guarantees.

Author: Agreed that both are important rationales, not sure either is more salient, so I'll add the "supply integrity" rationale.

> **Rationale - UX:** A new address format, in combination with the turnstile design, signals to users a boundary for privacy-guarantees.

Author: Pushed 57a1937 which adds a rationale explicitly for "supply integrity". How does that sound?

**Rationale - UX:** A separate shielded pool clarifies which funds rely on which underlying ZKP/cryptographic platform.

**Rationale - UX:** A separate shielded pool associated with a new address type makes it easier to reason about migration.

**Rationale - UX:** FIXME - protects users funds from turnstile Sapling compromise, but cannot protect price, of course.

## Mobile Wallet SDK Product Requirements

### SDKPR1. Mobile Wallet SDK Pollard address generation from existing root secret.

**Requirement:** The ECC Mobile Wallet SDK supports generating new Pollard addresses based on a user's pre-existing backup/restore root secret prior to Mainnet Activation.

**Rationale - Engineering:** Wallet vendors who rely on the SDK can add Pollard features prior to Mainnet activation.

**Rationale - UX:** Wallet vendors can generate Pollard addresses without requiring users to back up any new secrets.

**Rationale - UX:** Wallet vendors can support importing compatible secrets in a new wallet which will have access to pre-Pollard-activation funds and also support Pollard addresses.

### SDKPR2. Mobile Wallet SDK supports sending to Pollard addresses.

> **Requirement:** The ECC Mobile Wallet SDK supports sending funds to a Pollard address from a T-Address or a Pollard address upon Pollard activation.

Reviewer 3: There's no new transparent address support being added. I think the wording could be clarified.

> **Requirement:** The ECC Mobile Wallet SDK supports sending funds to a Pollard address from a T-Address or a Pollard address upon Pollard activation.

Author: I've removed all requirements on ECC products outside of specifically core consensus protocol requirements. This concern still stands for ECC's mobile wallet sdk and demo wallet, so let's resume this topic as we work on those product requirements.

**Rationale - Engineering:** Wallet vendors who rely on the SDK can add Pollard features prior to Mainnet activation.

### SDKPR3. Mobile Wallet SDK supports receiving to Pollard addresses.

**Requirement:** The ECC Mobile Wallet SDK supports receiving funds at a Pollard address from a T-Address or a Pollard address upon Pollard activation.

**Rationale - Engineering:** Wallet vendors who rely on the SDK can add Pollard features prior to Mainnet activation.

### SDKPR4. Mobile Wallet SDK supports turnstile migration from Sapling to Pollard addresses.

**Requirement:** The ECC Mobile Wallet SDK supports migrating funds from one or more Sapling addresses to a Pollard address.

**Rationale - Engineering:** Wallet vendors who rely on the SDK can add Pollard migration support prior to Mainnet activation.

### SDKPR5. Mobile Wallet SDK Pollard viewing key support.

> **Requirement:**  ECC Mobile Wallet SDK supports exporting and importing Pollard viewing keys, and scanning private transaction data based on those viewing keys.

Author: Non-protocol product requirements will be tracked elsewhere, and I removed them in a0d0019. Remind me of this concern as we refine those product requirements.

Pollard should match that of the Sapling circuit.

**Rationale - UX:** By being functional equivalent to Sapling, the existing Sapling
userbase can immediately carry over most conceptual knowledge and UX habits from
Sapling to Pollard.

**Rationale - Technical Strategy:** Pollard is the first step in removing the toxic waste
vulnerability as well as in deploying Halo 2. By targeting Sapling circuit functionality,
the scope of Pollard R&D is greatly simplified to lower the strategic technical risk.

### TSR2. Differences from Sapling Design Document

**Requirement:** Every observable difference from Sapling from the perspective of a Mobile Wallet SDK, a zcashd RPC developer, or any user of any known services built with those components, must be documented in a "Differences from Sapling" document in this repository. Any change that impacts a product-level requirement must exist in this document as an explicit requirement.

**Rationale - Technical Strategy:** Any deviation from Sapling needs to be clearly communicated to users and developers and reviewed by protocol engineers, product owners, and ecosystem stakeholders.

### TSR3. Halo 2 Deployment

> **Requirement:** Pollard must use Halo 2 for zeroknowledge proof validation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Requirement:** Pollard must use Halo 2 for zero knowledge proof validation.
```
